Add policy for generative artificial intelligence (#408)
cilium/community: AI-POLICY.md

# Cilium Generative AI Policy

To maintain the high quality and trustworthiness of contributions to the Cilium
community, we provide the following guidance on the use of "Generative
Artificial Intelligence", including large language models (LLMs), GitHub
Copilot, ChatGPT, Codex, Claude code, or similar tools ("Generative AI"). This

> guidance is intended for all contributors to the community:

Author: ```suggestion
Copilot, ChatGPT, Codex, Claude code, or similar tools ("Generative AI"). The
guidance in this document is intended for all contributors to the community.
As a Linux Foundation project, Cilium is also subject to the Linux Foundation
[Guidance Regarding Use of Generative AI Tools]. The guidance in this document
is intended to support you as a contributor in addition to the Linux Foundation 
guidance.

[Guidance Regarding Use of Generative AI Tools]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai
```

Author: The LF guidance states:

> Individual Linux Foundation projects may develop their own project-specific guidance and recommendations regarding AI-generated content.

This document is intended to fit into this, extending the existing LF guidance that contributions in the Cilium organization are already subject to.

## Guiding Principle

Cilium is a community-driven organization that values expertise, clear
communication, and personal responsibility. The community prides itself on a
commitment to high quality and trust amongst its members. To maintain this in
the AI era, we follow a key principle:

**What you do with Generative AI reflects on you**.

Successful ongoing contribution to this community is contingent on building
trust with the members of the organization through ongoing collaboration.
Whether or not Generative AI tools were involved, you are fully accountable for
the correctness, security, and clarity of your contributions. Human review is

> required for all code that is generated or assisted by Generative AI tools. If

Reviewer: nit: clarify that Gen AI code is not an exception
```suggestion
the correctness, security, and clarity of your contributions. Human review is
required for all code, including code generated or assisted by Generative AI tools. If
```

- Reformat or refactor existing content;
- Brainstorm ideas for implementation cases, but write the actual code yourself;
- Draft test cases which you subsequently review, revise and simplify before
  submission; or
- Analyze your own content submissions.

These uses are acceptable provided you:

- Are involved in the entire process for creating the contributions;
- Personally review and edit generated content before you submit it to the
  organization;
- Fully understand and review the content prior to submission;
- Take personal responsibility for the content, in the same way as if you
  authored the content without using Generative AI;
- Ensure the output adheres to project guidelines and licensing requirements; and
- Report the use of Generative AI tools for non-trivial preparation of
  submissions (that is, at level 2 or higher on the [AI Influence Level]).

## Unacceptable Use

It is not acceptable to use Generative AI tools to:

- Communicate in any Cilium community space with content that is substantially
  written using Generative AI tools. For example, it is not acceptable to send
  such text on Slack or GitHub in response to discussion with other community

>   members.

Reviewer: nit: I think starting long thread or gh issues should be called out as well

```suggestion
- Communicate in any Cilium community space with content that is substantially
  written using Generative AI tools. For example, it is not acceptable to send
  such text on Slack or GitHub, whether initiating or responding to discussion with other community
  members.
```

Reviewer 2: Might be worth calling out explicitly GH Issues and PR descriptions other than any other form of interactions (comments, threads). Despite having to describe high level technicalities in the issue/fix, the classic AI-generated (or adapted) 1000 lines of Markdown gives reviewer a heart attack and contains 99% unneeded info.

Author: I'm actually a little less concerned about the PR/issue description cases; it is typically fairly easy to tell that they're generated, so we can just refuse to read them and ask the contributor to rewrite it themselves with something similar to [this response](https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/contrib/replies/why-implement-like-this.txt) (see [this section for how to use such replies](https://github.com/cilium/cilium/tree/main/contrib/replies)). At some point soon we may also reject PRs from new contributors if they do not contain the PR template, which will likely help to steer such contributors towards writing useful PR descriptions.

It's the other cases that concern me more, because those cases can end up with reviewers spending significant time while the contributor spends next to zero time (just relaying Q&A with the :robot::slot_machine:).

Reviewer 3: I agree the other cases are more concerning, but shouldn't the policy be explicit about what's covered? AFAIU, Alex's suggestion doesn't change the intent of the policy, it just makes it explicit.

Author: For clarity: I agree with Alex's suggestion and I plan to apply that change.

community can benefit from those discussions even if Generative AI is used to
facilitate those discussions. When communicating in a language you are not
confident in, consider drafting your intended response and attempt to convey
your ideas in the target language first. If you believe the ideas are not
conveyed clearly, consider using translation tools (either non-generative or
generative). Be aware that if you rely significantly on Generative AI for
translation, this itself may inhibit communication due to limitations in
Generative AI tooling.

## Transparency & Attribution

We generally expect contributors to declare when Generative AI was used to
prepare a submission. For non-trivial text or code submissions (such as new
features, documentation pages, complex design proposals), you should describe
how Generative AI was used and explain the human review process applied. For
trivial use of Generative AI (such as spelling check or simple autocomplete)
you are not expected to declare use. Suspected use of Generative AI tooling
without transparency may lead to submissions being closed or rejected without
discussion.

## DCO and Licensing

> The Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO) is required for contributions to the

Author: ```suggestion
The [Developer Certificate of Origin] (DCO) is required for contributions to the
```

Cilium organization. AI tools often lack transparency into their training data

> and may produce copyrighted output. If you submit AI-assisted contributions,

Reviewer 4: I would strongly suggest to update the DCO to mandate developers to identify AI-assisted contributions with:

```
Assisted-by: AGENT_NAME:MODEL_VERSION [TOOL1] [TOOL2]
```

https://docs.kernel.org/process/coding-assistants.html#attribution

I would rephrase it as **must**. I can go into the details on why I think this is important if you want to, but might be obvious to everyone here.

Author: In general I don't think we have consensus on this, so I'd rather merge the existing text first and then open up a separate debate on this topic to amend these guidelines.

That said, I think it's reasonable to have the discussion about this particular point, so if you could put forth the argument then that could help to facilitate discussion.

Reviewer 4: Two reasons:

1) I think it's a deference to the reviewer. Reviewers don't have to guess whether it's genAI assisted / coded or not. While I think the bar should be the same (genAI assisted or not), I would also think we want to be a tad more cautios with contributions using this new technology.

2) There is some debate about genAI and copyright, as also noted in this PR. I don't think it will go anywhere. But if it were, it would then be _way easier_ to find commits that were genAI assisted and revert + rewrite to avoid any copyright claims.

Author: Regarding (1), the expectation at this point at least for cilium/cilium is that all PR descriptions disclose AI usage. This policy explicitly requests disclosure earlier in the text, but without explicitly specifying *how* (with the idea that individual projects like cilium/cilium can clarify the form they are looking for). cilium/cilium puts this into the PR template today. I think it's fair to request that people also disclose usage in commit messages. I also think we're likely to have a compliance problem if we attempt to _require_ this, especially since `git` does not provide any convenient UX for this. We already struggle with contributors failing to follow the checkpatch guidelines.

If we're discussing the exact format of the disclosure, I personally don't particularly want to see different AI companies competing for advertising space in our commit messages, and the model numbers are so fleeting they don't seem to be meaningful to the project. At most it seems to be a curiosity for statistics[^3]. So my vote in this regard would be also to go with AIL. I'm less interested in which brand of tool you used and more interested in how you used it and why you think that's an acceptable use of the tooling (including technical and legal, as you raise).

Regarding (2), if you are using Generative AI to create code and you do not believe that you have the right to submit the code, do not submit it. It's that simple. The Linux Foundation gives general guidance[^1] that submissions must be consistent with the existing licensing. We have always required DCO, and DCO already covers the copyright aspects clearly. If that's a grey area for you, do not submit the generated code. There are plenty of ways to make use of these tools that do not involve authoring code.

On a related note, I am not a lawyer, and this is not legal advice, but this article[^2] provides one perspective on the state of Generative AI currently.

[^1]: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai
[^2]: https://legallayer.substack.com/p/who-owns-the-claude-code-wrote
[^3]: If we want to do a developer survey on this, let's do a survey.

Reviewer 4: >If we're discussing the exact format of the disclosure, I personally don't particularly want to see different AI companies competing for advertising space in our commit messages

Agree on that.

> I also think we're likely to have a compliance problem if we attempt to require this, especially since git does not provide any convenient UX for this.

I am not sure why `git` UX is relevant here and what are you exactly referring to. 

My two cents on the tooling; I think we can easily have the bot extract `Asssisted by` tags, and at least add an `ai-assisted` label.

> At most it seems to be a curiosity for statistics[1](https://github.com/cilium/community/pull/408#user-content-fn-3-2c1c317325186cb2172c350058d02e29).

I think it might be useful to a reviewer to have _extra care_ (again the bar should be the same) for some models. I don't see much value on statistics. 

> On a related note, I am not a lawyer, and this is not legal advice, but this article[3](https://github.com/cilium/community/pull/408#user-content-fn-2-2c1c317325186cb2172c350058d02e29) provides one perspective on the state of Generative AI currently.

Yes, that's what I was referring to:

>> If the company that built the tool cannot cleanly assert copyright over its own AI-assisted code, the question of whether you can is worth taking seriously before it becomes relevant in a transaction, a dispute, or an acquisition conversation.

And I think there is value on having commits that use some form of AI assistance clearly marked.

Reviewer 5: Kubernetes has taken the opposite stance on this:

"Listing AI tooling as a co-author, co-signing commits using an AI tool, or using the assisted-by, co-developed or similar commit trailer is not allowed."

https://www.kubernetes.dev/docs/guide/pull-requests/#ai-guidance

Reviewer 6: Yeah, unless we are careful, the assisted-by becomes marketing for a specific company or model - which is one of the many reasons why Kubernetes said "no".

Author: > I think it might be useful to a reviewer to have extra care (again the bar should be the same) for some models.

@msune In the interests of gathering reviewer insights into this specific question, I've opened a poll on Slack:

https://cilium.slack.com/archives/C2B917YHE/p1778021380071049

Author: Capturing back observations from the Slack poll/thread until now:
- Question: `If you review code within Cilium, and your review was requested for a pull request that was created using Generative AI, what would you like to know? How might you use that knowledge?`
- Possible answers:
  - Boolean: Generative AI was used or not
  - Spectrum: How Generative AI was used, for example AIL
  - Detailed: Which specific tool/model the contributor used
  - Other: Let's discuss in the thread
- 18 respondents answered "Spectrum". One respondent answered "Other" (none).
- 2 respondents suggested in comments that sharing prompts could be useful.
  - 1 respondent countered: `I have reviewed PRs with the prompt included in the past and ended up not really getting any information out of the prompt either.` This comment had the most positive reactions, 6 :heavy_plus_sign: .
- 1 respondent asserted that they don't want AI disclosure at all. `If I don't understand the code as a reviewer, regardless of being AI generated or not, then I either request for changes or request the review from other committer with better knowledge on that area.`

Author: I believe the policy as proposed is consistent with the general consensus among committers and reviewers with respect to AI disclosure. The expectation that contributors disclose use is outlined in the policy, though I take the point of this thread overall which is that contributors would benefit from clearer guidance about the exact form that this takes.

For now, cilium/cilium will guide contributors by setting the expectation that [contributors disclose AIL in PR descriptions](https://github.com/cilium/cilium/pull/45266).

you are personally certifying that the contribution does not infringe on any
licenses and that you have the right to contribute it under the project's
license. If you’re unsure, **don’t submit it**.

> [AI Influence Level]: https://danielmiessler.com/blog/ai-influence-level-ail

Author: ```suggestion
[AI Influence Level]: https://danielmiessler.com/blog/ai-influence-level-ail
[Developer Certificate of Origin]: https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/contributing/development/contributing_guide/#developer-s-certificate-of-origin
```

# Cilium Generative AI Policy

To maintain the high quality and trustworthiness of contributions to the Cilium
community, we provide the following guidance on the use of "Generative
Artificial Intelligence", including large language models (LLMs), GitHub
Copilot, ChatGPT, Codex, Claude code, or similar tools ("Generative AI"). The
guidance in this document is intended for all contributors to the community. As
a Linux Foundation project, Cilium is also subject to the Linux Foundation

> [Guidance Regarding Use of Generative AI Tools]. The guidance in this document

Reviewer 7: Is there a reliable link we should provide here to find this policy?

confident in, consider drafting your intended response and attempt to convey
your ideas in the target language first. If you believe the ideas are not
conveyed clearly, consider using translation tools (either non-generative or
generative). Be aware that if you rely significantly on Generative AI for
translation, this itself may inhibit communication due to limitations in
Generative AI tooling.

## Transparency & Attribution

We generally expect contributors to declare when Generative AI was used to
prepare a submission. For non-trivial text or code submissions (such as new
features, documentation pages, complex design proposals), you should describe
how Generative AI was used and explain the human review process applied. For
trivial use of Generative AI (such as spelling check or simple autocomplete)
you are not expected to declare use. Suspected use of Generative AI tooling
without transparency may lead to submissions being closed or rejected without
discussion.

## DCO and Licensing

The [Developer Certificate of Origin] (DCO) is required for contributions to
the Cilium organization. AI tools often lack transparency into their training

> data and may produce copyrighted output. If you submit AI-assisted

Author: ```suggestion
data and may produce output with pre-existing copyright. If you submit AI-assisted
```

contributions, you are personally certifying that the contribution does not

> infringe on any licenses and that you have the right to contribute it under the

Author: "Less is more" here. This paragraph is not intended to establish anything new regarding licensing, it's just restating the importance in accordance with long-standing contribution policies of the Cilium project, and in consistency with the Linux Foundation [Guidance Regarding Use of Generative AI Tools](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/legal/generative-ai). Shorter, less verbose text makes this clearer.

```suggestion
contributions, you are personally certifying that you have the right to contribute them under the
```

Author: I applied this diff for clarity:

```diff
diff --git a/AI-POLICY.md b/AI-POLICY.md                                                                                                                                                                    
index 8de9d3a5065a..6f50a0c0cf7b 100644                                                                                                                                                                     
--- a/AI-POLICY.md                                                                                                                                                                                          
+++ b/AI-POLICY.md                                                                                                                                                                                          
@@ -102,10 +102,13 @@ discussion.                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 The [Developer Certificate of Origin] (DCO) is required for contributions to                                                                                                                               
 the Cilium organization. AI tools often lack transparency into their training                                                                                                                              
-data and may produce copyrighted output. If you submit AI-assisted                                   
-contributions, you are personally certifying that the contribution does not                          
-infringe on any licenses and that you have the right to contribute it under the                      
-project's license. If you’re unsure, **don’t submit it**.                                            
+data and may produce output with pre-existing copyright. If you submit                               
+AI-assisted contributions, you are personally certifying that you have the                           
+right to contribute the content under the project's license. The Linux                               
+Foundation [Guidance Regarding Use of Generative AI Tools] provides a more                           
+detailed description of your obligations as a contributor. If you’re unsure                          
+about the licensing of code you created using Generative AI tools,                                   
+**don’t submit it**.                                                                                 
                                                   
 [AI Influence Level]: https://danielmiessler.com/blog/ai-influence-level-ail                         
 [Developer Certificate of Origin]: https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/contributing/development/contributing_guide/#developer-s-certificate-of-origin
```
